README.md, before:

# MSK RAG Chatbot  
### Mechanism-Level Clinical Question Answering over MSK Neurology (Retrieval-Augmented Generation)

## TL;DR

- Domain-constrained RAG system for musculoskeletal neurology and biomechanics  
- Retrieval-first design with deterministic context assembly and explicit heuristics  
- Agentic query classification and rewrite to align user language with biomechanical mechanisms  
- No fine-tuning, no end-to-end black box; emphasis on inspectability and failure analysis

**This is:** A retrieval systems engineering case study in a constrained clinical domain.  
**This is not:** A diagnostic tool, autonomous clinician, or end-to-end learned medical model.

This repository implements a **retrieval-augmented question answering (RAG) system** for answering **mechanism-level clinical questions** grounded in a corpus derived from **MSKNeurology.com** (Kjetil Larsen).

Rather than treating the language model as an end-to-end reasoning engine, the system treats **answer quality as a downstream effect of retrieval quality**, and is designed to expose, constrain, and debug each step of the retrieval and context-selection process.

The system surfaces retrieved chunks, distances, heuristic adjustments, reranking behavior, token budgets, latency, and confidence signals so that outputs can be **inspected, audited, and failure-mode analyzed**, not merely consumed.

> **Note:** This system is not a medical device and does not provide diagnoses or treatment recommendations. It is an educational and research-oriented explainer grounded strictly in retrieved corpus content.

---

## Motivation

Musculoskeletal neurology is a narrow domain where valid explanations depend on **anatomy, biomechanics, and neurovascular space**, typically described in long-form clinical articles rather than structured knowledge bases.

General-purpose language models frequently hallucinate or over-generalize in this domain when used without strong retrieval constraints, particularly when asked “why” or “mechanism” questions.

This project explores how far **explicit retrieval design, deterministic context assembly, and domain-encoded heuristics**—rather than increasingly complex prompting or fine-tuning—can improve answer traceability, interpretability, and robustness in a specialized clinical corpus.

---

## System overview

The system is structured as a **three-stage pipeline**: offline corpus processing, persistent retrieval infrastructure, and online query-time reasoning.

### 1. Offline corpus processing

- HTML articles from MSKNeurology.com are mirrored locally.
- Text is cleaned and segmented using **sentence-first, token-aware chunking**.
- Each chunk is annotated with article, section, position, and token-length metadata.
- Outputs are persisted as a structured chunk table (`chunks.parquet`) used for downstream retrieval.

### 2. Persistent retrieval infrastructure

- Dense embeddings are generated for all chunks using a **SentenceTransformers-compatible embedding model** with L2-normalized vectors.
- Embeddings and metadata are stored in a **persistent ChromaDB collection**, rebuilt explicitly via a standalone builder script.
- All retrieval artifacts are **immutable at query time**, enabling reproducible behavior across runs.

### 3. Query-time reasoning

For each user query:

1. **Agentic query classification** assigns the query to a biomechanical category (benign, MSKNeurology-style syndrome, rare/serious, or unclear).
2. The query is **rewritten into biomechanics-aligned language** to improve dense retrieval alignment with the corpus.
3. Dense retrieval is performed against the persistent vector store.
4. **Domain-specific heuristic biasing** adjusts distances to promote mechanism-dense sections (e.g., anatomy, biomechanics, assessment) and penalize narrative or low-yield content (e.g., case reports).  
   Long-form clinical text has structure that dense embeddings alone do not respect. Section headers, narrative vs. mechanism content, and article context matter. Heuristics encode these domain priors explicitly so failure modes remain inspectable.

  
5. An **optional LLM-based reranker** reorders chunks *within each source article* rather than globally. Reranking is deliberately constrained to preserve article coherence.
6. Retrieved chunks are **grouped by source**, prioritized by section, and **deterministically packed under a fixed token budget**, including controlled neighbor headroom.
7. A grounded answer is generated **strictly from the assembled context**, with no external knowledge injection.

<img width="6044" height="3124" alt="MSK RAG architecture diagram" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2b376e20-653e-4885-b228-b4ec330d98f0" />

---

## Key design choices

- **Retrieval first, generation last:** The language model explains retrieved mechanisms; it does not invent them.
- **Agentic retrieval alignment:** Queries are classified and rewritten to match the biomechanical language used in the corpus.
- **Heuristic biasing over opaque ranking:** Section priority, narrative penalties, and topic bonuses encode domain knowledge explicitly.
- **Deterministic context assembly:** Token budgets, per-source limits, and selection rules are fixed and inspectable.
- **Per-source reranking:** Optional LLM reranking operates within articles to preserve topical coherence.
- **Telemetry by default:** Retrieval confidence, timing, token usage, and selected sources are exposed in the UI.
- **CPU-only execution:** The system is designed to run locally without GPUs or specialized hardware; LLM usage is limited to query-time reasoning.
- **Reproducible by construction:** Immutable vector stores, fixed retrieval rules, and deterministic context packing yield identical behavior for identical inputs.


<img width="2879" height="1799" alt="Streamlit UI with retrieval telemetry" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a5cf6d57-edfe-41cc-a4ae-5779213506d7" />


---

## Local setup 

This project is intended primarily as a **retrieval systems engineering case study**.  
Running it locally is optional and aimed at inspection rather than end-user deployment.

### Requirements
- Python 3.10+
- An OpenAI API key (`OPENAI_API_KEY`) in .env
- Prebuilt embedding and vector store artifacts (by using the process mentioned below)

### Typical local workflow

```bash
# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# (Optional) Rebuild corpus artifacts

#Create chunks.parquet with:
python Text_Extraction/textExtract.py
#OR use chunks.parquet from MSKArticlesINDEX/

#Create embeddings npy files with chunks.parquet:
python Embedding/embedding.py
#OR use embeddings.npy from embeddings

#Create chroma_store with npy files:
python VectorDB/ChromaDB.py

# Launch the Streamlit UI
streamlit run chatbot/mskbot.py
#This calls qaEngine to run the chatbot. 
```

## Repository structure

```text
msk_chat/
├── chatbot/
│   └── mskbot.py                 # Streamlit UI and interaction layer
│
├── Text_Extraction/
│   └── textExtract.py            # HTML cleaning and token-aware chunking
│
├── Embedding/
│   └── embedding.py              # Embedding generation
│
├── VectorDB/
│   ├── ChromaDB.py               # Persistent vector store construction/loading
│   ├── qaEngine.py               # Core RAG logic (retrieval, biasing, reranking, packing)
│   └── retrieval.py              # Retrieval utilities
│
├── MSKArticlesINDEX/
│   ├── all_articles.jsonl        # Article-level metadata
│   ├── chunks.parquet            # Chunk table with text and metadata
│   └── mskneurology.com/         # Offline HTML mirror
│
├── embeddings/                   # Generated embedding artifacts
├── chroma_store/                 # Persistent ChromaDB store
│
├── Eval/                         # Evaluation scripts and plots
├── Evaluation/                   # Metric histories across runs
│
├── reviewGoldset.py              # Gold set inspection and annotation UI
└── chunk_editor.py               # Chunk repair

Commit message:

Update README with demo details and limitations
Added information about the hosted Streamlit demo and its limitations.

README.md, after:

# MSK RAG Chatbot  
### Mechanism-Level Clinical Question Answering over MSK Neurology (Retrieval-Augmented Generation)

## TL;DR

- Domain-constrained RAG system for musculoskeletal neurology and biomechanics  
- Retrieval-first design with deterministic context assembly and explicit heuristics  
- Agentic query classification and rewrite to align user language with biomechanical mechanisms  
- No fine-tuning, no end-to-end black box; emphasis on inspectability and failure analysis

**This is:** A retrieval systems engineering case study in a constrained clinical domain.  
**This is not:** A diagnostic tool, autonomous clinician, or end-to-end learned medical model.

This repository implements a **retrieval-augmented question answering (RAG) system** for answering **mechanism-level clinical questions** grounded in a corpus derived from **MSKNeurology.com** (Kjetil Larsen).

Rather than treating the language model as an end-to-end reasoning engine, the system treats **answer quality as a downstream effect of retrieval quality**, and is designed to expose, constrain, and debug each step of the retrieval and context-selection process.

The system surfaces retrieved chunks, distances, heuristic adjustments, reranking behavior, token budgets, latency, and confidence signals so that outputs can be **inspected, audited, and failure-mode analyzed**, not merely consumed.

> **Note:** This system is not a medical device and does not provide diagnoses or treatment recommendations. It is an educational and research-oriented explainer grounded strictly in retrieved corpus content.

---

## Motivation

Musculoskeletal neurology is a narrow domain where valid explanations depend on **anatomy, biomechanics, and neurovascular space**, typically described in long-form clinical articles rather than structured knowledge bases.

General-purpose language models frequently hallucinate or over-generalize in this domain when used without strong retrieval constraints, particularly when asked “why” or “mechanism” questions.

This project explores how far **explicit retrieval design, deterministic context assembly, and domain-encoded heuristics**—rather than increasingly complex prompting or fine-tuning—can improve answer traceability, interpretability, and robustness in a specialized clinical corpus.

---

## System overview

The system is structured as a **three-stage pipeline**: offline corpus processing, persistent retrieval infrastructure, and online query-time reasoning.

### 1. Offline corpus processing

- HTML articles from MSKNeurology.com are mirrored locally.
- Text is cleaned and segmented using **sentence-first, token-aware chunking**.
- Each chunk is annotated with article, section, position, and token-length metadata.
- Outputs are persisted as a structured chunk table (`chunks.parquet`) used for downstream retrieval.

### 2. Persistent retrieval infrastructure

- Dense embeddings are generated for all chunks using a **SentenceTransformers-compatible embedding model** with L2-normalized vectors.
- Embeddings and metadata are stored in a **persistent ChromaDB collection**, rebuilt explicitly via a standalone builder script.
- All retrieval artifacts are **immutable at query time**, enabling reproducible behavior across runs.

### 3. Query-time reasoning

For each user query:

1. **Agentic query classification** assigns the query to a biomechanical category (benign, MSKNeurology-style syndrome, rare/serious, or unclear).
2. The query is **rewritten into biomechanics-aligned language** to improve dense retrieval alignment with the corpus.
3. Dense retrieval is performed against the persistent vector store.
4. **Domain-specific heuristic biasing** adjusts distances to promote mechanism-dense sections (e.g., anatomy, biomechanics, assessment) and penalize narrative or low-yield content (e.g., case reports).  
   Long-form clinical text has structure that dense embeddings alone do not respect. Section headers, narrative vs. mechanism content, and article context matter. Heuristics encode these domain priors explicitly so failure modes remain inspectable.

  
5. An **optional LLM-based reranker** reorders chunks *within each source article* rather than globally. Reranking is deliberately constrained to preserve article coherence.
6. Retrieved chunks are **grouped by source**, prioritized by section, and **deterministically packed under a fixed token budget**, including controlled neighbor headroom.
7. A grounded answer is generated **strictly from the assembled context**, with no external knowledge injection.

<img width="6044" height="3124" alt="MSK RAG architecture diagram" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2b376e20-653e-4885-b228-b4ec330d98f0" />

---

## Key design choices

- **Retrieval first, generation last:** The language model explains retrieved mechanisms; it does not invent them.
- **Agentic retrieval alignment:** Queries are classified and rewritten to match the biomechanical language used in the corpus.
- **Heuristic biasing over opaque ranking:** Section priority, narrative penalties, and topic bonuses encode domain knowledge explicitly.
- **Deterministic context assembly:** Token budgets, per-source limits, and selection rules are fixed and inspectable.
- **Per-source reranking:** Optional LLM reranking operates within articles to preserve topical coherence.
- **Telemetry by default:** Retrieval confidence, timing, token usage, and selected sources are exposed in the UI.
- **CPU-only execution:** The system is designed to run locally without GPUs or specialized hardware; LLM usage is limited to query-time reasoning.
- **Reproducible by construction:** Immutable vector stores, fixed retrieval rules, and deterministic context packing yield identical behavior for identical inputs.


<img width="2879" height="1799" alt="Streamlit UI with retrieval telemetry" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a5cf6d57-edfe-41cc-a4ae-5779213506d7" />


---

## Local setup 

This project is intended primarily as a **retrieval systems engineering case study**.  
Running it locally is optional and aimed at inspection rather than end-user deployment.

### Requirements
- Python 3.10+
- An OpenAI API key (`OPENAI_API_KEY`) in .env
- Prebuilt embedding and vector store artifacts (by using the process mentioned below)

### Typical local workflow

```bash
# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# (Optional) Rebuild corpus artifacts

#Create chunks.parquet with:
python Text_Extraction/textExtract.py
#OR use chunks.parquet from MSKArticlesINDEX/

#Create embeddings npy files with chunks.parquet:
python Embedding/embedding.py
#OR use embeddings.npy from embeddings

#Create chroma_store with npy files:
python VectorDB/ChromaDB.py

# Launch the Streamlit UI
streamlit run chatbot/mskbot.py
#This calls qaEngine to run the chatbot. 
```
A hosted Streamlit demo is available:

https://mskchat.streamlit.app/

Important limitations:

- The hosted demo does not include the full persistent vector store.
- API keys are not provided in the public deployment.
- Retrieval may therefore return no results or be partially disabled.

The demo is intended to illustrate:

- The user interface
- Retrieval telemetry and observability
- Query classification and rewriting
- System structure and flow
  
  It is not intended as a fully functional public clinical tool.
  
## Repository structure

```text
msk_chat/
├── chatbot/
│   └── mskbot.py                 # Streamlit UI and interaction layer
│
├── Text_Extraction/
│   └── textExtract.py            # HTML cleaning and token-aware chunking
│
├── Embedding/
│   └── embedding.py              # Embedding generation
│
├── VectorDB/
│   ├── ChromaDB.py               # Persistent vector store construction/loading
│   ├── qaEngine.py               # Core RAG logic (retrieval, biasing, reranking, packing)
│   └── retrieval.py              # Retrieval utilities
│
├── MSKArticlesINDEX/
│   ├── all_articles.jsonl        # Article-level metadata
│   ├── chunks.parquet            # Chunk table with text and metadata
│   └── mskneurology.com/         # Offline HTML mirror
│
├── embeddings/                   # Generated embedding artifacts
├── chroma_store/                 # Persistent ChromaDB store
│
├── Eval/                         # Evaluation scripts and plots
├── Evaluation/                   # Metric histories across runs
│
├── reviewGoldset.py              # Gold set inspection and annotation UI
└── chunk_editor.py               # Chunk repair
